📝(review) add documentation for code reviews (#9)
openfun/handbook: code-reviews.md

This concept raises questions about their effectiveness and relevance both on the side of the developer submitting the review and on the side of the developers reviewing the code.

> When ? How? How long do we review codes?
> Which focus? Which feedback to give to the reviewer?

## Approach of code reviews

Repository managers such as Github or GitLab are helpful to review codes.
Associated workflows, pull request \(PR\) or merge request \(MR\) easies the tracking of information shared in code reviews.

We recommend considering a fine granularity of code reviews.
The benefit is both temporal and qualitative.
By doing code reviews as frequently as possible, the exercise is made easier and all members feel more involved in development.
By doing light and targeted code reviews on a specific topic, the review is done with more attention because it is less complex.

A code review is an opportunity to **actively** communicate about the changes to other developers and get feedback on the quality of the changes.
To obtain results on a daily scale, it should not be costly in terms of human energy and time.

> 

Author: I will rephrase this part by qualifying what I wrote on the different cases encountered.

> 

Author: @sampaccoud I have changed the idea behind this paragraph with your point. Feel free to tell me if it fits better now !

> 

Reviewer: <img src="https://media.giphy.com/media/mFBIHvRrntt2JJLkrp/giphy.gif">

Question the developer by asking him why he did it rather than being prescriptive.
Code reviews is an exercise that enhances the value of the work produced in a team spirit.

2. Have a pragmatic state of mind ✔️

It is important to keep in mind that what is provided is functional.
External parameters can force the developer not to provide optimal code.
He/she is not omniscient and learns from teamwork too.
Having a functional is the paramount issue (considering that good practices of coding are respected).

3. Review as often as possible 🕙

Code reviews will be relevant and beneficial if the exercise is frequent within the team.
It is not the business of a few members but of everyone because they contribute to the good integration and involvement of everyone.

4. Focus on the main 🧠

A code review should not be overthought.
The reviewer should focus on the algorithm and the code.
With a problem comes a solution.
It must be possible to be synthetic and have a global vision of what is in question.

5. Communicate positively and with consideration 😃

Finally, the most important is the way to communicate.
One has to keep a warm and team spirit.

> As said before, a code review is not a review and benefits the whole team.

Author: You're right. I wanted to write "a code review is not an exam" ;)

# Code reviews at FUN

> Code reviews are collaborative steps in software development.

Reviewer 2: As it is at FUN, I wouldn't use the term **software**, if we want to add a word to describe our work, maybe I would more use project, app ? ...

```suggestion
Code reviews are collaborative steps in development.

```

Author: ```suggestion
Code reviews are collaborative steps in software development.
Code reviews are collaborative steps in the development of our project.
```

The purpose of code reviews is twofold. They allow both to:
* check the quality of the code and

> * to communicate actively on the evolution of the software.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* to communicate actively on the evolution.

```

> Code reviews concern all members who are involved in software development, regardless of their competence level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Code reviews concern all members who are involved in the development team, regardless of their competence level.

```

maybe we can find better, but it's just the term 'software' that doesn't seem relevant in our case.

This concept raises questions about their effectiveness and relevance both on the side of the developer submitting the review and on the side of the developers reviewing the code.

> When ? How? How long do we review codes?
> Which focus? Which feedback to give to the reviewer?

## Approach of code reviews

Repository managers such as GitHub or GitLab are helpful to review codes.
Associated workflows, pull request \(PR\) or merge request \(MR\) ease the tracking of information shared in code reviews.

We recommend considering a fine granularity of code reviews.
The benefit is both temporal and qualitative.
By doing code reviews as frequently as possible, the exercise is made easier and all members feel more involved in development.
By doing light and targeted code reviews on a specific topic, the review is done with more attention because it is less complex.

A code review is an opportunity to **actively** communicate about the changes to other developers and get feedback on the quality of the changes.

> As far as possible, a code review should be done for small changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As far as possible, a code review should be done in small changes.

```

In this perspective, we advise against doing code reviews for a collection of changes that can be analyzed independently.
However, it is important to keep in mind that what is under review must be understandable in its software context.

> Complex refactorings or features can not be splitted in small changes as they would lose software design information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some complex refactorings or features can not be split in small changes as they would lose software design information.

```

> The review would then bypass the algorithmic choices in favor of a simple technical review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The review would then fail to comment on design choices and be limited to a simple technical review.

```

> When starting a review, we recommend to assess the granularity of the review to keep visible the algorithm and design of the feature.

Reviewer: It seems that this advice is targeted to the developer, not the reviewer?

Author: Yes it is. It is for good practices of reviews, all along the process. Developers are also responsible to start the review on good basis. A reviewer can notice that the review to be done isn't well sructured and inform the developer.

Reviewer: There's something wrong in the sentence I think. Should it read "when opening a Pull Request (vs MR)?

Author: Tell me if I am wrong, I consider opening a pull request as the first step/start of a review

Reviewer: I would say the developer opens a PR and the reviewer starts reviewing (hence starts the review). So it's not the developer who starts a review 😉

Author: Ok, let's write it like this! I'll make the modification

The point here is to question what has been produced. It is not because the proofreader has difficulty understanding the code that the quality of the code is poor.
Question the developer by asking him why he did it rather than being prescriptive.
Code reviews is an exercise that enhances the value of the work produced in a team spirit.

2. Have a pragmatic state of mind ✔️

It is important to keep in mind that what is provided is functional.
External parameters can force the developer not to provide optimal code.
He/she is not omniscient and learns from teamwork too.
Having a functional code is the paramount issue (considering that good practices of coding are respected).

3. Review as often as possible 🕙

Code reviews will be relevant and beneficial if the exercise is frequent within the team.
It is not the business of a few members but of everyone because they contribute to the good integration and involvement of everyone.

4. Focus on the main 🧠

A code review should not be overthought.
The reviewer should focus on the algorithm and the code.
With a problem comes a solution.
It must be possible to be synthetic and have a global vision of what is in question.

> 5. Communicate positively and with consideration 😃

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure of the way this bloc is written, I get what you're saying though :-) there's two sentences that I would work on.

Author: I see what you mean. Connections between ideas are missing. I'll fix it

Finally, the most important is the way to communicate.

> One has to keep a warm and team spirit.

Reviewer 2: I find it weirdly said

```suggestion
We want to keep a warm and team spirit
```

Author: You're right. It's better to keep talking about OUR point of view, as I did the whole document long.

As said before, a code review is not an exam and benefits the whole team.

> We are used to decorate messages with emojis or add gifs.

Reviewer 2: Don't you want to say something like this ?
```suggestion
We are encouraging on decorating messages with emojis or add gifs.
```

Author: I like it like this, too. More suggestive!

# Code reviews at FUN

Code reviews are collaborative steps in the development of our projects.

> The purpose of code reviews is twofold. They allow both to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The purpose of code reviews is twofold. They allow both to:

```

However, it is important to keep in mind that what is under review must be understandable in its software context.
Some complex refactorings or features can not be split in small changes as they would lose software design information.
The reviewer would then fail to comment on design choices and be limited to a simple technical review.

When opening a pull request \(PR\) or merge request \(MR\) for a review, we recommend to assess the granularity of the review to keep visible the algorithm and design of the feature.

## Best practices for reviewing codes

The challenge of a code review is to position oneself in the face of another member's work production.
It is not a question of sanctioning his/her work, but of assessing it; issuing an opinion.

Here are 5 good practices to adopt that may be beneficial for a code review.

1. Engage conversation for clarification 💬

The point here is to question what has been produced.
It is not because the reviewer has difficulty understanding the code that the code quality is bad.
Code reviews is an exercise that enhances the value of the work produced in a team spirit.

> We recommend to asking the developer why he/she did it rather than being prescriptive and tell developer to code in a specific way.

Reviewer: I think it's recommend + infinitive but not sure?

Author: Yes, it's "we recommend to ask" or "we recommend asking" but definitely not both of them ...

Reviewer: I knew something was wrong! You nailed it ^^

Reviewer 2: Just to contribute :-), or you could say "we recommend on asking"

> > I am not sure to understand. What was your point when doing this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> I am not sure to understand. What was your point when doing this?

```

Also, to discuss about the choices made by the developer, we encourage to suggest alternatives that could optimize what has been done.

> > Doing it like this could solve the problem in only one step. What do you think of it ? (WDYT ?)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Doing it like this could solve the problem in only one step. What do you think of it? (WDYT?)

```

2. Have a pragmatic state of mind ✔️

It is important to keep in mind that what is provided is functional.
External parameters can force the developer not to provide optimal code.

> He/she is not omniscient and learns from teamwork too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
He/she is not omniscient and learns from team work too.

```

Having a functional code is the paramount issue (considering that good practices of coding are respected).

3. Review as often as possible 🕙

Code reviews will be relevant and beneficial if the exercise is frequent within the team.

> It is not the business of a few members but of each one of them because such exercises contribute to the good integration and involvement of everyone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is not the business of a few members but of each one of them because such exercise contribute to the good integration and involvement of everyone.

```

4. Focus on the main 🧠

A code review should not be overthought.
The reviewer should focus on the algorithm and the code.
With a problem comes a solution.
It must be possible to be synthetic and have a global vision of what is in question.

5. Communicate positively and with consideration 😃

Finally, the most important is the way to communicate during a review.
We want to keep a warm and team spirit in the perspective of celebrating and encouraging progress in a joyful and motivating mood.

> In addition to ensuring that positive and enthusiastic comments are always written, we support the use of gifs and emojis in messages and \(PR)\ or \(MR\) conversations 😉

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to ensuring that positive and enthusiastic comments are always written, we encourage? the use of gifs and emojis in messages and \(PR)\ or \(MR\) conversations 😉

```

Author: I just wanted to use an other word as I wrote "encouraging" in the previous sentence.

Reviewer 2: It's much better !! 
[![Alt text](https://media.giphy.com/media/YOZ7IdqmLJTZ93LUEX/giphy.gif)

maybe as there is a debat :  In addition to ensuring that positive and enthusiastic comments are always written, don't hesitate on using gifs and emojis in messages and \(PR)\ or \(MR\) conversations 😉

> In addition to ensuring that positive and enthusiastic comments are always written, we support the use of gifs and emojis in messages and \(PR)\ or \(MR\) conversations 😉

Reviewer 3: Why escaping parenthesis?

> ### Reference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Reference

```
